[Music]
well we've explored a fraction of the
ocean most of the earth and parts of our
solar system but do you ever wonder what
everything around us is made up of you
might be surprised that the most
abundant elements in the universe are
limited on earth what happens below the
Earth's crust is inaccessible to us but
not for our lack of trying in 1970 we
tried to dig a hole that would go below
the crust that was the Kola borehole
located in Northwest Russia the project
lasted 20 years without much success at
forty thousand two hundred thirty feet
drillers encountered high temperatures
reaching 356 degrees and had to stop the
hole with just nine inches in diameter
and it's considered to be the deepest
hole in the world in terms of true
vertical depth according to the National
Academy of Science the Earth's core
consists of about 89 percent iron six
percent nickel four percent sulfur in
less than 1% trace elements which means
we have no idea what they are but we do
know what's in the Earth's crust there
are 94 elements that occur naturally on
earth to find the rarest let's start
with a few of the most abundant oxygen
would be number one on that list apart
from its presence in the atmosphere as a
gas it's also present in rocks
now don't go sniffing them because
that's just weird it's there as an oxide
ah I know what you're wondering so here
it goes
oxide is a chemical compound that has at
least one oxygen atom and one other
element these guys are very common in
the Earth's crust and they have a solid
state the third most plentiful element
is aluminum oxide the most natural form
of this is corundum beautiful gems like
sapphires and rubies are forms of
corundum but they owe their unique
colors to trace impurities
for example sapphires get their shades
from iron and titanium while rubies get
their burgundy color from the presence
of chromium and with the helping hand of
lasers
the tenth most abundant element on our
list is hydrogen it's the simplest
element in the universe and it goes all
the way back to the Big Bang that was
about 15 billion years ago when the
universe was extremely dense and hot as
it slowly cooled down the temperatures
got better for the building blocks of
matter to begin forming these were
electrons and quarks
at first they were sort of floating
around as plasma then it got cooler and
the quarks concentrated into nucleons to
understand this
think of how steam condenses the liquid
droplets as the vapor gets cold that
allowed some protons and neutrons to
fuse into the helium nuclei it took
about 380,000 years for atoms to be
formed at one point the universe was
only hydrogen today it's the most common
element in the universe occupying 73% of
it the second one is helium which takes
up 25% and the other 2% are trace
elements hydrogen on earth however is
very low if we compare it to the
universe it used to be a lot more when
the earth was formed but as a lighter
gas it started floating up into space
the 17th most abundant element is carbon
which is also the second most common
element in our bodies holding 18% of its
mass in fact it would be impossible for
life to exist without carbon but in the
Earth's crust it dips below zero
occupying only 0.02 percent in 21st
place we have chromium it's naturally
found in soils water rocks and even dust
since it's basically all over the ground
you can find it in plants the foods that
we eat animals and drinks it doesn't
have a taste smell or color zinc holds
the 24th place small traces of zinc are
found in the ocean water and the air our
bodies even using to help with our sense
of taste and smell 10 places down you'll
find nitrogen this guy makes up 78% of
the air we breathe yet it's quite rarer
in
the Earth's crust occupying only 0.00
19% for the gardeners out there here's
something interesting
plants get nitrogen from the soil which
is an essential nutrient that helps them
grow and creates their food through
photosynthesis but some veggies get
their nitrogen from the air we breathe
instead of the soil like beans and peas
and number 47
we have hafnium this little element is
never alone it's always found as a solid
object with another compound called
zirconium but hafnium is twice as dense
as its companion
what's the two separate it can be used
as a nuclear reactor control rod
speaking of nuclear reactors the most
interesting one is uranium two places
down scientists believe that the Sun was
born from the ashes of a supernova they
based that on evidence of complex heavy
metals such as uranium which gets mine
to fuel nuclear power plants the Sun
doesn't have enough heat to create any
elements heavier than iron so uranium
can only be created in a huge cosmic
explosion for example when a star has
burned up all of its fuel and the core
collapses iodine is the sixty-first
element on the list it's the heaviest of
the stable halogens and it has a dark
purple color it was first discovered in
1811 but was given a name two years
later since it was a violet shape its
name translates to that color in Greek
there's more iodine in the ocean than in
the Earth's crust seaweed is loaded with
it on earth it's merely found
underground near natural gas and oil
reserves now we've reached the 72nd
which is helium this guy is quite
impressive it's abundant in space but
unfortunately it doesn't really enjoy
the atmosphere on earth but get this the
Sun is made of helium and hydrogen atoms
and that's what gives it fuel there's so
much pressure in the Sun that the
hydrogen atoms collide with each other
to form helium atoms that's the fusion
process there
of it is given off as energy 600 million
tons of hydrogen are fused into 595
million tons of helium so the question
is why can't we find it on earth well
it's sort of leaks out of the atmosphere
since it's so light which is why helium
balloons rush to the sky when you let go
of them
helium is also the first noble gas which
means that it doesn't react with other
elements to form compounds the
partygoers will love this one in the
73rd place we have neon the name means
new it was discovered in 1898 the air
holds more of it than the Earth's crust
because it has very high vapor pressure
in low temperatures when you're out and
about at night you can see it in
advertising in club signs it glows an
orange --red color when it's placed in a
glass tube but it's not that simple
in order to activate that bright
luminosity you need high-voltage
electricity we're getting closer folks
at number 74 we have platinum it's
mostly found in copper and nickel ores
in South Africa this guy is so rare that
only a few hundred tons are produced
every year and it has many uses - like
electrical contacts equipment and costly
jewelry speaking of expensive shiny
things
Gold is right after platinum and you can
tell it's pretty rare by its hefty price
tag you probably also know how it's used
but you may not have known that it's
edible or that earthquakes can turn
water into the precious metal the most
astonishing thing about it though is
that it can be found inside our bodies
and now it's time for the rarest element
on earth astatine with the most stable
isotope has an eight hour half-life the
rest of them go on for less than a
second to a few minutes I'm guessing
that's how it got its name which
translates to unstable scientists can't
even study it in bulk because its
properties disappear as soon as they
appear
it just vaporizes from the production of
heat during decay chemists were on the
hunt for this missing element for deck
they believe it has a shiny black
metallic color here's how it came about
in 1869 a Russian chemist named Dmitri
Mendeleev created an extended version of
the periodic table and found some room
for our missing element it belonged to
the halogen group until they found it
they gave it the name eka iodine
since it belonged to the same family
with fluorine chlorine bromine and
iodine scientists all over the world
were going back and forth to discover
the element and gave it various names
until the University of California
stepped in and managed to reproduce it
in 1940 researchers artificially
recreated astatine by bombarding the
isotope bismuth-209 with alpha particles
inside a particle accelerator astatine
209 and 211 can only be created in small
quantities astatine 211 is used in
nuclear medicine to treat certain facts
it's estimated that there's less than
one gram of astatine in the whole earth
and that it comes from the decaying of
uranium and thorium
now our chances of coming across it are
less than one in a trillion and even
then we won't know hey if you learn
something new today then give the video
a like and share it with a friend and
here are some other cool videos I think
you'll enjoy just click to the left or
right and remember stay on the bright
side of life